---
layout: post
title: "What does it cost to live a day?"
author: Flo
date: 2019-11-11T11:31:31+11:00
tags: ["Life", "ideas", "FIRE", "financialIndependence", "habits"]
slug: what-does-it-cost-to-live-a-day
draft: false
meta_title: "What does it cost to live a day?"
image: iphone-distraction.jpg
categories: ["life"]
category: life
---

I've been thinking about the topic of what it actually costs to live one day. This initiated by reading about people like Bodensee Overlander or The Way Overland, who take a few years off to just travel the world. So I was wondering how much time I could actually take off with my current savings - or asking a different way, how much does a day of living cost?

# How much does a day of living cost?

Say we require an amount of $ 100 to live a day. With $ 100,000 we could take off 1,000 days - which is a couple of years already. What if you spin this even further; how much capital do I need to invest in something like an index fund to live off the interest rate? Let's stick with $ 100/day and an average interest of 4%.

$ 100 * 365 days = 36,500 $/year
$ 36,500 / 0.04 =  $ 912,500

Roughly $ 900K is required under the assumption we earn 4% interest per year and require only $ 100/day. It's a simple example, but it shows that such a saving plan does not have to be difficult and if one is willing to adjust their life accordingly it looks achievable.

Let's say you have a job that pays you $ 100K / year. With cheap living and frugal lifestyle you might be able to fork out 50% as savings.

$ 912,500 / $ 50,000 = 18.2 years

So if your start with 25 you might get to retirement by 43 (pay raise, kids and change in circumstances excluded).

It's sure worth to tweak this a little based on your personal circumstances. Teaming up with a partner is good as you will have two incomes and can share the expenses.

I guess the hardest part is a change in mindset, can you actually be so disciplined to live frugal instead of going out, buying fancy stuff and driving an expensive car?

## New Economics by Henry Thoreau

Henry Thoreau in his book Walden did this interesting experiment of moving into a hut in the woods away from the town he was living in, building the hut himself and trying to live as self contained as possible. An aspect in his book is economics - the cost for his style of living and the conclusions he draws from his experiment.

The necessities of life according to him are food, shelter, clothing and fuel and so he concludes that any excess possessions not only require excess labor to purchase them, but also lead to worry and constraint. So if you buy that fancy car you might have to work more and it could bring you more worry and constraints than joy. I guess there's some truth to this. Your car might get you worried about potential damage, loss in value, it's huge fuel consumption, rego and insurance cost, the extra parking you need to pay and that your neighbor, after all, still has a faster car.

If possessions don't lead to joy, are they worth the effort one needs to undertake to acquire them? It's all about the [opportunity costs](https://www.joshuakennon.com/everything-in-life-has-an-opportunity-cost/). What could you be doing if you weren’t doing what you’re doing. If you decide to buy that new couch you can't spend the money on your next vacation.

From here it gets quite philosophical; are you going to spend your life working day in day out just to arrive at home and start scrolling on instagram and watch tv or are you going to keep in mind the opportunity cost and do something that might be more valuable for your life.

# FIRE - Financial Independence, Retire Early

Concepts and ideas like the calculation above have a lot of followers, mainly summarized under the [FIRE movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIRE_movement).  

You may have heard about FIRE, it partly deals with my above question. How can one become financially independent, living without working, paying bills from interest generated by your invested capital.

```
If you are happy with living a lower middle class lifestyle, then you would need between $800,000 – $1,600,000 in investable assets returning 2.5% – 5% a year to replicate the $40,000 in gross annual income. Of course if you’ve been investing in the bull market for the past 10 years, you’ve likely seen a higher return than 5%. But over the long run, it’s best to stay conservative since downturns do happen.

- https://www.financialsamurai.com/three-levels-of-financial-independence/
```

Another aspect is a frugal lifestyle. Lot's of [ideas around](https://www.afamilyonfire.com/category/frugal-living/) this, but you have to decide for yourself if you want to Attend events for free food and wine, buy nothing new or save money by growing your own fruits.

# This all seems a bit too much

I don't quite fancy the idea of working until 67 just to retire and figure out my body is too old to do all the fun stuff I'd like to do now that I'm in my thirties. Not to mention all the bad things that can happen to you on your way to 67. On the other hand I don't want to live off rice and beans and live in a shed. There must be ways to combine the best of both worlds...

## Mini Retirements

Tim Ferriss describes this in his book.

## Sabbaticals?

## Working from a nice location?

We currently live in Manly, NSW, Australia and this place is amazing. It's just the type of town you'd go on holiday to and a lot of people actually do. It has nice warm weather, the sea breeze, the ocean at your doorstep and all the convenience of good restaurants, shopping and public transport into the biggest Australian city. Before moving here, I thought how I would cope with the reduction of leave days from 32 in Germany to just 20 in Australia (and 20 is quite good here). The fact is with living in a location where other people dream of going on their holidays almost makes you have a little bit of holiday feeling every day - I will need to test how long this actually lasts and if people who have been living here ever since feel the same way.

Location is the key component to the financial independence equation. Because location determines cost of living, in terms of housing, transportation costs, food, and available services.

- https://www.retirebeforedad.com/move-achieve-financial-independence/

## Working in a high paying location, living in a cheap location